Multiparty Key Exchange, Efficient Traitor Tracing, and More from
Indistinguishability Obfuscation
Abstract
In this work, we show how to use indistinguishability obfuscation (iO) to build multiparty
key exchange, efficient broadcast encryption, and efficient traitor tracing. Our schemes enjoy
several interesting properties that have not been achievable before:
• Our multiparty non-interactive key exchange protocol does not require a trusted setup.
Moreover, the size of the published value from each user is independent of the total number
of users.
• Our broadcast encryption schemes support distributed setup, where users choose their own
secret keys rather than be given secret keys by a trusted entity. The broadcast ciphertext
size is independent of the number of users.
• Our traitor tracing system is fully collusion resistant with short ciphertexts, secret keys,
and public key. Ciphertext size is logarithmic in the number of users and secret key size is
independent of the number of users. Our public key size is polylogarithmic in the number
of users. The recent functional encryption system of Garg, Gentry, Halevi, Raykova, Sahai,
and Waters also leads to a traitor tracing scheme with similar ciphertext and secret key
size, but the construction in this paper is simpler and more direct. These constructions
resolve an open problem relating to differential privacy.
• Generalizing our traitor tracing system gives a private broadcast encryption scheme (where
broadcast ciphertexts reveal minimal information about the recipient set) with optimal
size ciphertext.
Several of our proofs of security introduce new tools for proving security using indistinguishability
obfuscation.
10
Conclusion and Open Problems
We give the first construction of multiparty key exchange requiring no trusted setup and prove
security in the static and semi-static models. Building on these ideas we get the first distributed
broadcast encryption scheme, that is, every party generates its own secret key. We also construct a
short-ciphertext recipient-private broadcast encryption scheme from which we obtain traitor tracing
with very short parameters. Our constructions extend to give identity-based broadcast encryption.
Along the way we develop new techniques for proving security using indistinguishability obfuscation.
We leave several open problems. We obtain adaptive security for our broadcast encryption and
recipient private schemes using the conversion of Gentry and Waters [GW09]. No such conversion is
known for multiparty key exchange, and achieving adaptive security for key exchange from iO is
an interesting open problem. While our traitor tracing system has short public keys, our general
recipient private broadcast system has long public keys, and we leave open the problem of reducing
the public key size of our construction.
