The Automatic Scientist will be a Data System
1.
VISION: AUTOMATIC SCIENTIST
For thousands of years science happens in a rather manual way.
Mathematics, engineering and computer science provide the means
to automate some of the laborious tasks that have to do with com-
putation, data collection and management, and to some degree pre-
dictability. As scientific fields grow more mature, though, and sci-
entists over-specialize a new problem appears that has to do with
the core of the scientific process rather with the supporting steps.
It becomes increasingly harder to be aware of all research
concepts and techniques that may apply to a given problem.
A critical step when generating new concepts and explaining ex-
isting phenomena is being aware of existing concepts/techniques
and how they can be combined. This is true in a single scientific
area at a time but it is exacerbated across areas, i.e., we can easily
miss opportunities to leverage advances across unfamiliar areas. In
addition, this is important when we try to explain a phenomena,
e.g., in medicine when a doctor tries to match an existing patient to
the vast space of possible conditions or when a surgeon tries to de-
cide what the best next step should be in real time during a surgery.
Computer science already helps in significant ways. Recent ad-
vances include automation in feature engineering [1] and hypoth-
esis generation [2] by analyzing past research. What we propose
here is to take one step further and map existing research concepts
(at a fine granularity) in a unified model and then treat that as a data
management and analytics problem.
We envision a future when scientists rely on software tools not
only to collect, manage and analyze data but also to generate ideas,
make it easy to solve problems by combining existing research con-
cepts across one or more areas, get suggestions about possible next
steps, and find errors, semi-automating the scientific process. In the
same way that modern data systems organize the world’s data and
facilitate data processing in numerous areas in businesses and sci-
ences, we envision that “auto-science data systems” will be able to
abstract and speed up the scientific process across numerous scien-
tific fields. Auto-science systems are “scientist-in-the-loop” envi-
ronments that leverage intuition and experience of scientists along
with automation provided by the tools for the parts of the scientific
process that rely on combining/tuning past work in novel ways.
RESEARCH PATH
For the research path below, assume automatic generation of data
system architectures as an example of automating research and test-
ing of new ideas.
Modeling Research. Similar to the relational model, we need a
unified model that is generic enough to capture the necessary infor-
mation needed to describe basic research concepts and their com-
binations. Such a model should capture research concept charac-
teristics, such as when it applies, its dependencies, cost metrics and
side-effects, and tuning parameters.
Declarative Research Processing. In addition, we need domain
specific languages that allow us to browse existing research con-
cepts, synthesize more complex ones and run what-if questions on
top of the possible designs space. These new class of queries will
be tailored to speed up research by leveraging the structure of re-
search concepts e.g., find how we can best solve problem X (spe-
cific requirements R) given existing research concepts that can be
combined to satisfy R or find the weakest link in a research solution
that can be described as a combination of concepts.
Searching for the Right Design. The next step is to develop algo-
rithms that can automatically iterate over possible solutions given
a problem and a research library. Being able to estimate the im-
pact of a research concept once applied to a solution is key. For
example, in the example of automating data systems research, on-
line code generation and a modular architecture can help rank solu-
tions. Randomized iterative algorithms are key to be able to solve
problems in little time and potentially also use such approaches in
scenarios where quick adaptivity is important.
Summary. The auto-scientist is a data system that stores research
concepts and allows scientists to interactively navigate the research
space to speed up research. It also brings opportunities in education
of young scientists and verifiability of research solutions. It resem-
bles in many ways the path that the database community followed
to develop systems for data management - only this time this is an
effort that has to happen in collaboration with the target scientific
fields to develop the right models and expressibility. In addition,
we expect many research challenges to be analogous to database
systems, e.g.: Can we indeed have a single model or we need mul-
tiple models which brings data integration problems? Do we need
polystores that store concepts from different fields? Our commu-
nity has several existing ideas to seed such a research landscape.
